Introduce ".well-known/smart-configuration", change liberty config layout, and update user's guide (#939)
IBM/FHIR: docs/src/pages/guides/FHIRServerUsersGuide.md

- [5 Appendix](#5-appendix)
  * [5.1 Configuration properties reference](#51-configuration-properties-reference)
  * [5.2 Keystores, truststores, and the FHIR server](#52-keystores-truststores-and-the-fhir-server)

>   * [5.3 OpenID Connect and OAuth 2.0](#53-openid-connect-and-oauth-2_0)

Author: ```suggestion
  * [5.3 OpenID Connect and OAuth 2.0](#53-openid-connect-and-oauth-20)
```

As stated earlier, the FHIR server is installed with a default configuration in `server.xml` which includes the definition of a keystore (`fhirKeystore.jks`) and a truststore (`fhirTruststore.jks`)<sup id="a7">[7](#f7)</sup>. These files are provided only as examples and while they may suffice in a test environment, the FHIR server deployer should generate a new keystore and truststore for any installations where security is a concern. Review the information in the following topics to learn how to configure a secure keystore and truststore.

### 5.2.2 WebApp security

> By default, the FHIR server REST API is only available via HTTPS on port 9443 and protect by HTTP basic authentication.

Author: ```suggestion
By default, the FHIR server REST API is only available via HTTPS on port 9443 and is protected by HTTP basic authentication.
```

Alternatively, the server can use OpenID Connect and OAuth 2.0 via a Bearer Token as described in [Section 5.2.4 Oauth 2.0](#524-oauth-20).
In addition, the FHIR server web application can be secured via client certificate-based authentication.

Here are some notes related to these authentication schemes:
*   Basic authentication is a very simple authentication scheme and should only be used over HTTPS because the username and password are essentially transmitted in plain text.
*   OAuth 2.0 authentication can only be used in conjunction with an HTTPS endpoint because the OAuth authorization steps rely on SSL handshake negotiations.
*   Client certificate-based authentication can only be used in conjunction with an HTTPS endpoint since it involves SSL handshake negotiations. The main value of client authentication is that the server is able to securely authenticate the client through the use of certificates.

### 5.2.3 Configuring mutual TLS authentication

> To properly configure the FHIR server's keystore and truststore files, perform the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To properly configure the FHIR server's keystore and truststore files, perform the following steps.
```

end in a period, since the other parts are now no longer build points rather sections

6.  Import the client's public key certificate into the server's truststore:

    ```
    keytool -keystore serverTruststore.jks -storepass change-password -import -file client-public-key.cer
    ```

At this point, you should have a client keystore that contains a client certificate whose Distinguished Name's Common Name component is set to the username. You should also have a client truststore which contains the server's public key certificate. Essentially, the server and client both have a keystore that contains their own private and public key certificate and they both have a truststore which contains the public key certificate of their counterpart.

### 5.2.3.1 Configure the server
Copy the server keystore (`serverKeystore.jks`) and truststore (`serverTruststore.jks`) files to the appropriate directory (`$WLP_HOME/usr/servers/fhir-server/resources/security`). Then configure the `server.xml` file correctly to reference your new keystore and truststore files.

### 5.2.3.2 Configure the client
The precise steps required to configure certificate-based authentication for a client application depend on the specific REST API client framework, but these are the general rules:

> *   If the client is using the FHIR server's HTTPS endpoint, then the client truststore should be configured with the REST API client framework<sup id="a11">[11](#f11)</sup>.

Author: ```suggestion
*   If the client is using the FHIR server's HTTPS endpoint, then the client's truststore should be configured with the certificate of the FHIR server<sup id="a11">[11](#f11)</sup>.
```

*   If the client is using basic authentication, then it must send an appropriate Authorization request header containing the username and password information in the HTTP request.

> *   If the client is using client certificate-based Authentication, then the client keystore must be configured with the REST API client framework<sup id="a12">[12](#f12)</sup>.

Author: ```suggestion
*   If the client is using client certificate-based Authentication, then the client keystore must be configured with a certificate that is trusted by the FHIR server<sup id="a12">[12](#f12)</sup>.
```

*   If the client is using OAuth 2.0 Authentication, then the client keystore must be configured with the REST API client framework. In addition, it must send an appropriate Authorization request header containing the Bearer token in the HTTP request.

## 5.3 OpenID Connect and OAuth 2.0
The FHIR specification recommends the use of OpenID Connect and OAuth 2.0.
The IBM FHIR Server supports these via Liberty's OpenID Connect support.

> The following sections are adapted from https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/SSD28V_liberty/com.ibm.websphere.wlp.core.doc/ae/twlp_config_oidc_pc_examp_beginner.html and related pages in the WebSphere Liberty knowledge center, but they apply to OpenLiberty
> as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following sections are adapted from [WebSphere Liberty knowledge center](https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/SSD28V_liberty/com.ibm.websphere.wlp.core.doc/ae/twlp_config_oidc_pc_examp_beginner.html) and related pages; the steps apply to OpenLiberty as well.
```

### 5.3.1 Configure Liberty as the OpenID Connect Provider

> Liberty can be configured to act as an OpenID Connect Provider via the [openidConnectServer-1.0 feature](https://openliberty.io/docs/ref/feature/#openidConnectServer-1.0.html).

Reviewer: maybe mention that the server.xml has the feature enabled by default? it's just not configured?

Author: ```suggestion
Liberty can be configured to act as an OpenID Connect Provider via the [openidConnectServer-1.0 feature](https://openliberty.io/docs/ref/feature/#openidConnectServer-1.0.html). This feature is enabled by default, but must be configured as described in the following sections to take effect.
```

### 5.3.1.1 Configure Liberty as an OAuth 2.0 Provider

> OpenID Connect is built on OAuth 2.0 and so you must first configure Liberty as an OAuth provider as described at https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/SSEQTP_liberty/com.ibm.websphere.wlp.doc/ae/twlp_oauth_defining.html.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenID Connect is built on OAuth 2.0 and so you must first configure Liberty as an OAuth provider as described at [Defining OAuth](https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/SSEQTP_liberty/com.ibm.websphere.wlp.doc/ae/twlp_oauth_defining.html).
```

Liberty supports the registration of clients through either a localStore in the server.xml or a databaseStore in a configured dataSource.

> To support "dynamic client registration", use a databaseStore by:

Reviewer: should this be datasource? 
```suggestion
To support "dynamic client registration", use a dataSource by:
```

Author: No, I think `databaseStore` is right.  Previous sentence says you can use a "localStore" or a "databaseStore" and that is the actual element under `oauthProvider`.

1. Configuring a clientManager oauth-role and specifying a databaseStore in the oauthProvider element of `server.xml`.
    For example, to use Apache Derby for the store, include something like the following:
    ```
    <oauth-roles>
        <authenticated>
            <special-subject type="ALL_AUTHENTICATED_USERS"/>
        </authenticated>
        <clientManager>
            <group name="clientAdministrator" />
        </clientManager>
    </oauth-roles>

    <oauthProvider id="oauth2-provider" oauthOnly="false" allowPublicClients="true" jwtAccessToken="true">
        <grantType>authorization_code</grantType>
        <databaseStore dataSourceRef="OAuthDataSource" />
    </oauthProvider>

    <dataSource id="OAuthDataSource" jndiName="jdbc/OAuth2DB">
        <properties.derby.embedded createDatabase="create" databaseName="derby/oauth2db" />
        <jdbcDriver libraryRef="derbyLib"/>
    </dataSource>

    <library id="derbyLib">
        <fileset dir="${shared.resource.dir}/lib/derby" includes="*.jar"/>
    </library>
    ```

> 2. Manually creating the necessary tables in your database as described at https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/SSD28V_liberty/com.ibm.websphere.wlp.core.doc/ae/twlp_oauth_dbs.html:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Manually creating the necessary tables in your database as described at [OAuth Databases](https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/SSD28V_liberty/com.ibm.websphere.wlp.core.doc/ae/twlp_oauth_dbs.html):
```

> ```

Reviewer: put this in a file in the `fhir-server`?

Author: yeah.  i still think its dumb that we need to create these tables at all...why doesn't it just auto-create the tables like the batch feature?
anyway, I need to decide how to package all this info to make it easier to configure.  I was thinking it would just be an optional configDropin, but then we have this stupid DDL that we need to run.  Maybe we just invoke it as part of fhir-persistence-schema even though its only used if you are using OAuth with a databaseStore...

Author: I've now modified `fhir-persistence-schema` to deploy these tables by default.
Additionally, I updated the derby bootstrapping to create them when the `jdbc/OAuth2DB` datasource is available.

  SUBTYPE VARCHAR(64),
  CREATEDAT BIGINT,
  LIFETIME INT,
  EXPIRES BIGINT,
  TOKENSTRING VARCHAR(2048) NOT NULL,
  CLIENTID VARCHAR(64) NOT NULL,
  USERNAME VARCHAR(64) NOT NULL,
  SCOPE VARCHAR(512) NOT NULL,
  REDIRECTURI VARCHAR(2048),
  STATEID VARCHAR(64) NOT NULL,
  EXTENDEDFIELDS CLOB NOT NULL DEFAULT '{}'
);

CREATE TABLE OAuthDBSchema.OAUTH20CLIENTCONFIG
(
  COMPONENTID VARCHAR(256) NOT NULL,
  CLIENTID VARCHAR(256) NOT NULL,
  CLIENTSECRET VARCHAR(256),
  DISPLAYNAME VARCHAR(256) NOT NULL,
  REDIRECTURI VARCHAR(2048),
  ENABLED INT,
  CLIENTMETADATA CLOB NOT NULL DEFAULT '{}'
);

CREATE TABLE OAuthDBSchema.OAUTH20CONSENTCACHE
(
  CLIENTID VARCHAR(256) NOT NULL,
  USERID VARCHAR(256),
  PROVIDERID VARCHAR(256) NOT NULL,
  SCOPE VARCHAR(1024) NOT NULL,
  EXPIRES BIGINT,
  EXTENDEDFIELDS CLOB NOT NULL DEFAULT '{}'
);

----- ADD CONSTRAINTS -----
ALTER TABLE OAuthDBSchema.OAUTH20CACHE
  ADD CONSTRAINT PK_LOOKUPKEY PRIMARY KEY (LOOKUPKEY);

ALTER TABLE OAuthDBSchema.OAUTH20CLIENTCONFIG
  ADD CONSTRAINT PK_COMPIDCLIENTID PRIMARY KEY (COMPONENTID,CLIENTID);

----- CREATE INDEXES -----
CREATE INDEX OAUTH20CACHE_EXPIRES ON OAUTHDBSCHEMA.OAUTH20CACHE (EXPIRES ASC);
```

> 3. Attempting to register a client (based on https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/SSEQTP_liberty/com.ibm.websphere.wlp.doc/ae/twlp_client_registration.html). The endpoint is determined by the id value of the oauthProvider element from the previous step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Attempting to register a client (based on the [Client Registration Article](https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/SSEQTP_liberty/com.ibm.websphere.wlp.doc/ae/twlp_client_registration.html)). The endpoint is determined by the id value of the oauthProvider element from the previous step.
```

For example, for an OAuth provider with `id="oauth2-provider"`:
```
curl -u 'fhiruser:change-password' 'https://localhost:9443/oidc/endpoint/oauth2-provider/registration' \
--header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
--data-raw '{
   "token_endpoint_auth_method":"client_secret_basic",
   "scope":"launch launch/patient offline_access openid profile user/*.* patient/*.*",
   "grant_types":[
      "authorization_code",
      "client_credentials",
      "implicit",
      "refresh_token",
      "urn:ietf:params:oauth:grant-type:jwt-bearer"
   ],
   "response_types":[
      "code",
      "token",
      "id_token token"
   ],
   "application_type":"web",
   "subject_type":"public",
   "post_logout_redirect_uris":[
      "http://localhost:4567/inferno/oauth2/static/redirect"
   ],
   "preauthorized_scope":"launch launch/patient offline_access openid profile user/*.* patient/*.*",
   "introspect_tokens":true,
   "trusted_uri_prefixes":[
      "https://server.example.com:9000/trusted/"
   ],
   "redirect_uris":[
      "http://localhost:4567/inferno/oauth2/static/redirect"
   ]
}'
```

### 5.3.1.2 Configure Liberty as an OAuth 2.0 Provider

> To add the OpenID Connect Provider config, you must first create a key to use for
> the signatureAlgorithm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add the OpenID Connect Provider config, you must first create a key to use for the signatureAlgorithm.
```

> Note: the current private key in the fhirKeystore.jks keystore is NOT usable as a signing key.
> Instead, allow Liberty to generate its own keystore and use that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: the current private key in the fhirKeystore.jks keystore is NOT usable as a signing key.  Instead, allow Liberty to generate its own keystore and use that.
```

Assuming the defaultKeyStore has a valid key for signing, add the openidConnectProvider element to your server.xml:
```
<openidConnectProvider id="oidc-provider"
    oauthProviderRef="oauth2-provider"
    keyStoreRef="defaultKeyStore"
    signatureAlgorithm="RS256" />
```

### 5.3.1.3 Request an access token

> After you've registered a client (either via dynamic registration or static config) and configured the openidConnectProvider, invoke
> the token endpoint with the configured code for your client to obtain an access token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you've registered a client (either via dynamic registration or static config) and configured the openidConnectProvider, invoke the token endpoint with the configured code for your client to obtain an access token.
```

The specific endpoint is determined by the id value of the openidConnectProvider element from the previous section.

> For example, for an OpenID Connect provider with `id="oidc-provider"`, the auth URL will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, for an OpenID Connect provider with `id="oidc-provider"`, the auth URL is
```

> `https://[host]:[port]/oauth2/endpoint/oidc-provider/authorize` and the token URL will be `https://[host]:[port]/oauth2/endpoint/oidc-provider/token`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`https://[host]:[port]/oauth2/endpoint/oidc-provider/authorize` and the token URL is `https://[host]:[port]/oauth2/endpoint/oidc-provider/token`.
```

### 5.3.2 Configure Liberty as the OpenID Connect Relying Party
Liberty can be configured to act as an OpenID Connect Relying Party via the [openidConnectClient-1.0 feature](https://openliberty.io/docs/ref/feature/#openidConnectClient-1.0.html).

### 5.3.2.1 Configure the trustStore
1. Export the server's certificate from the configured keystore via one of the following commands:

> * keytool -exportcert -keystore key.p12 -storepass Password -alias default -file libertyOP.cer
> * keytool -exportcert -keystore key.jks -storepass Password -alias default -file libertyOP.cer
> 
> 2. Import the certificate into the server's trustStore. Assuming you use the same keystore for both, then use of these:
> * keytool -importcert -keystore key.p12 -storepass Password -alias libertyop -file libertyOP.cer -noprompt
> * keytool -importcert -keystore key.jks -storepass Password -alias libertyop -file libertyOP.cer -noprompt

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `keytool -exportcert -keystore key.p12 -storepass Password -alias default -file libertyOP.cer`
* `keytool -exportcert -keystore key.jks -storepass Password -alias default -file libertyOP.cer`

2. Import the certificate into the server's trustStore. Assuming you use the same keystore for both, then use of these:
* `keytool -importcert -keystore key.p12 -storepass Password -alias libertyop -file libertyOP.cer -noprompt`
* `keytool -importcert -keystore key.jks -storepass Password -alias libertyop -file libertyOP.cer -noprompt`
```

### 5.3.2.2 Configure server.xml
Add an openidConnectClient element to the server.xml config and point at the trustStore from the previous section:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``` xml
```

doing this one for formatting demo

<openidConnectClient id="RS" inboundPropagation="required"
    clientId="inferno"
    mapIdentityToRegistryUser="true"
    trustStoreRef="defaultKeyStore"
    trustAliasName="libertyop"
    validationEndpointUrl="https://localhost:9443/oidc/endpoint/oidc-provider/introspect"
    signatureAlgorithm="RS256"
    authFilterRef="filter"
    issuerIdentifier="https://localhost:9443/oauth2/endpoint/oauth2-provider,https://host.docker.internal:9443/oauth2/endpoint/oauth2-provider"
    />

<authFilter id="filter">

>     <requestUrl urlPattern="/fhir-server" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <requestUrl urlPattern="/fhir-server" />
```
should we make a note about bulkimport not being client usable?

Author: I guess we should figure out how to secure that endpoint via OAuth too...not totally sure how to handle the different groups yet.

</authFilter>
```

> Note: if the server is also acting as an OAuth/OpenId Connect provider, be sure to include an authFilter to avoid a catch-22 where
> the token and authorization endpoints are themselves protected by the openidConnectClient.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: if the server is also acting as an OAuth/OpenId Connect provider, be sure to include an authFilter to avoid the problem where the token and authorization endpoints are protected by the openidConnectClient.
```

### 5.3.3 Configure the fhir-server

> To configure the FHIR Server with the OpenID Connect and OAuth 2.0 endpoints for the providers,
> specify the following values in the default fhir-server-config.json file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure the FHIR Server with the OpenID Connect and OAuth 2.0 endpoints for the providers, specify the following values in the default fhir-server-config.json file:
```

* `fhirServer/oauth/regUrl`
* `fhirServer/oauth/authUrl`
* `fhirServer/oauth/tokenUrl`

> When the Liberty server is the OpenID Connect / OAuth 2.0 provider, use a placeholder of `<host>` in the property values
> to have the server automatically replace this text with the hostname of the original request (see `fhirServer/core/originalRequestUriHeaderName`).
> 
> These values will be used to populate the corresponding entries in both the server capability statement (`GET [base]/metadata`)
> and the smart-configuration (`GET [base]/.well-known/smart-configuration`).
> 
> For example, the following excerpt from a CapabilityStatement shows sample OAuth-related URLs (token, authorize, and register) as values of the `valueUri` elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the Liberty server is the OpenID Connect / OAuth 2.0 provider, use a placeholder of `<host>` in the property values to have the server automatically replace this text with the hostname of the original request (see `fhirServer/core/originalRequestUriHeaderName`).

These values will be used to populate the corresponding entries in both the server capability statement (`GET [base]/metadata`) and the smart-configuration (`GET [base]/.well-known/smart-configuration`).

For example, the following excerpt from a CapabilityStatement shows sample OAuth-related URLs (token, authorize, and register) as values of the `valueUri` elements.
```

      "security": {
        "extension": [
          {
            "url": "http://fhir-registry.smarthealthit.org/StructureDefinition/oauth-uris"
            "extension": [
              {
                "url": "token",
                "valueUri": "https://localhost:9443/oauth2/endpoint/oauth2-provider/token"
              },
              {
                "url": "authorize",
                "valueUri": "https://localhost:9443/oauth2/endpoint/oauth2-provider/authorize"
              },
              {
                "url": "register",
                "valueUri": "https://localhost:9443/oidc/endpoint/oidc-provider/registration"
              }
            ]
          }
        ],
…
```

> SMART on FHIR applications should use the `.well-known` endpoint to determine the OAuth URLs to use for authorization,

Author: ```suggestion
SMART on FHIR applications should use the `.well-known/smart-configuration` endpoint to determine the OAuth URLs to use for authorization,
```
